arXiv:2010.15503v2 [hep-lat] 16 Feb 2021

Overview of the QCD phase diagram Recent progress from the lattice
Jana N. Guenther
Aix Marseille Univ., Universit┤e de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, Marseille, France
12/17/2020
In recent years there has been much progress on the investigation of the QCD phase diagram with lattice QCD simulations. In this review I focus on the developments in the last two years. Especially the addition of external influences or new parameter ranges yield an increasing number of interesting results. I discuss the progress for small, finite densities from both extrapolation based methods (Taylor expansion and analytic continuation for imaginary chemical potential) and Complex Langevin simulations, for heavy quark bound states (quarkonium), the dependence on the quark masses (Columbia plot) and the influence of a magnetic field. Many of these conditions are relevant for the understanding of both the QCD transition in the early universe and heavy ion collision experiments which are conducted for example at the LHC and RHIC.
1 Introduction
The strong interaction between quarks and gluons in the standard model is described by Quantum Chromo Dynamics (QCD). The investiagation of the phase diagram of QCD has been an active subject for many years. A special focus of this research is on the transition between hadrons at low temperature and the quark gluon plasma at high temperature. The nature of the transition as an analytic crossover (Ref. [1ş6]) has been known since 2006 (Ref. [1, 2]). However, different external influences may change the nature of this transition. One famous example is the addition of a chemical potential. The crossover has been established for vanishing baryon chemical potential only, which
jana.gunther@univ-amu.fr
1

means for a setting with the same number of quarks and anti-quarks. This setting is a good approximation for the QCD transition in the early universe. However, the experimental investigations of the QCD transition rely on heavy ion collision experiments which produce the quark gluon plasma with a finite density. In addition, the collided matter goes through several stages and is not permanently in an equilibrium. Since, at the moment, full QCD cannot be solved under that conditions one has to take other paths. Certain parameter ranges can be described efficiently by effective theories. For other situations we depend on phenomenological models, which inturn require input information that can be gained from lattice simulations.
The progress on the phase diagram form lattice QCD corresponds well with, and is in part triggered by, an increasing number of available experimental results. At the moment most erxperimental results for heavy ion collision experiments are generated either by the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at Cern in Genf, Switzerland or the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at the Brookhaven national laboratory in New York, USA. While the results form the LHC are at low densities, RHIC accesses information for lager chemical potential. However, there are several upcoming facilities that will allow inside to even higher densities. Some of them are for example the Nuclotron-based Ion Collider fAcility (NICA) at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) in Dubna, Russia, the Compressed Baryonic Matter Experiment (CBM) at the Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research in Europe (FAIR) at Darmstadt, Germany and the J-PARC heavy ion project (J-PARC-HI) at the Japan Proton Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) in Tokai, Japan.
After this introduction, I will briefly describe the stages of a heavy ion collision experiment in section 2. Linking lattice QCD to heavy ion collision experiments requires results at low finite density which I discuss in section 3. The main challenge in this parameter range is the infamous sign problem which is discussed in section 3.1. For continuum extrapolated, physical results, one therefore has to rely on extrapolations (section 3.2) form vanishing (Taylor method) or imaginary chemical potential. One method that is getting relatively close to direct lattice simulations at finite density are Complex Langevin simulations, which are therefore reviewed in section 3.3. Other methods that are not discussed in this review are for example reweighting techniques [7ş10], density of state methods [11, 12], using the canonical ensemble [13ş15], formulations with dual variables [16] or Lefschetz thimbles [17, 18].
Another way to gain information on finite density QCD is discussed in section 4, the lattice simulations of effective field theories. Here, I focus, with section 4.1 on the results for heavy quark bound states the so called heavy quarkonium.
Despite the importance at finite density, also for zero density there are interesting influences to consider. One of them is the dependence of the transition type on the quark masses. It is often summarized in the Columbia plot, which is discussed in section 5. The most interesting areas of the Columbia plot are the upper right (section 5.5) and lower left corner (section 5.1). Due to the low quark masses, and the resulting expensive computations, different tactics are employed in the study of the lower left corner of the Columbia plot. In this review I discuss the use of imaginary chemical potential in section 5.2 and the variation of the number of quark flavors in section 5.3. Due to the lack
2

