arXiv:2308.07915v2 [quant-ph] 21 Feb 2024

High-threshold and low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum memory
Sergey Bravyi1, Andrew W. Cross1, Jay M. Gambetta1, Dmitri Maslov1, Patrick Rall2, and Theodore J. Yoder1
1IBM Quantum, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 (USA) 2IBM Quantum, MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, Cambridge, MA 02142 (USA)
February 22, 2024
Abstract Quantum error correction becomes a practical possibility only if the physical error rate is below a threshold value that depends on a particular quantum code, syndrome measurement circuit, and decoding algorithm. Here we present an end-to-end quantum error correction protocol that implements fault-tolerant memory based on a family of LDPC codes with a high encoding rate that achieves an error threshold of 0.8% for the standard circuitbased noise model. This is on par with the surface code which has remained an uncontested leader in terms of its high error threshold for nearly 20 years. The full syndrome measurement cycle for a length-n code in our family requires n ancillary qubits and a depth-7 circuit composed of nearest-neighbor CNOT gates. The required qubit connectivity is a degree-6 graph that consists of two edge-disjoint planar subgraphs. As a concrete example, we show that 12 logical qubits can be preserved for nearly one million syndrome cycles using 288 physical qubits in total, assuming the physical error rate of 0.1%. We argue that achieving the same level of error suppression on 12 logical qubits with the surface code would require nearly 3000 physical qubits. Our findings bring demonstrations of a low-overhead fault-tolerant quantum memory within the reach of near-term quantum processors.
1 Introduction
Quantum computing attracted attention due to its ability to offer asymptotically faster solutions to a set of computational problems compared to the best known classical algorithms [1]. It is believed that a scalable functioning quantum computer may help solve computational problems in such areas as scientific discovery, materials research, chemistry, and drug design, to name a few [2, 3, 4, 5].
The main obstacle to building a quantum computer is the fragility of quantum information, owing to various sources of noise affecting it. Since isolating a quantum computer from external effects and controlling it to induce a desired computation are in conflict with each other, noise appears to be inevitable. The sources of noise include imperfections in qubits, materials used, controlling apparatus, State Preparation and Measurement (SPAM) errors, and a variety of external factors ranging from local man-made, such as stray electromagnetic fields, to those inherent to the Universe, such as cosmic rays. See Ref. [6] for a summary. While some sources of noise can be eliminated with better control [7], materials [8], and shielding [9, 10, 11], a number of other sources appear to be difficult if at all possible to remove. The latter kind can include spontaneous and stimulated emission in trapped ions [12, 13], and the interaction with the bath (Purcell Effect) [14] in superconducting circuits--covering both leading quantum technologies. Thus, error correction becomes a key requirement for building a functioning scalable quantum computer.
The possibility of quantum fault tolerance was established earlier [15]. Encoding a logical qubit redundantly into many physical qubits enables one to diagnose and correct errors by repeatedly measuring syndromes of parity check operators. However, error correction is only beneficial if the hardware error rate is below a certain threshold value that depends on a particular error correction protocol. The first proposals for quantum error correction, such as concatenated codes [16, 17, 18], focused on demonstrating the theoretical possibility of error suppression. As understanding of quantum error correction and the capabilities of quantum technologies matured, the focus shifted
1

to finding practical quantum error correction protocols. This resulted in the development of the surface code [19, 20, 21, 22] that offers a high error threshold close to 1%, fast decoding algorithms, and compatibility with the existing quantum processors relying on 2-dimensional (2D) square lattice qubit connectivity. Small examples of the surface code with a single logical qubit have been already demonstrated experimentally by several groups [23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. However, scaling up the surface code to a hundred or more logical qubits would be prohibitively expensive due to its poor encoding efficiency. This spurred interest in more general quantum codes known as Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [28]. Recent progress in the study of LDPC codes suggests that they can achieve quantum faulttolerance with a much higher encoding efficiency [29]. Here, we focus on the study of LDPC codes, as our goal is to find quantum error correction codes and protocols that are both efficient and possible to demonstrate in practice, given the limitations of quantum computing technologies.
A quantum error correcting code is of LDPC type if each check operator of the code acts only on a few qubits and each qubit participates only in a few checks. Multiple variants of the LDPC codes have been proposed recently including hyperbolic surface codes [30, 31, 32], hypergraph product [33], balanced product codes [34], two-block codes based on finite groups [35, 36, 37, 38], and quantum Tanner codes [39, 40]. The latter were shown [39, 40] to be asymptotically "good" in the sense of offering a constant encoding rate and linear distance Ł a parameter quantifying the number of correctable errors. In contrast, the surface code has an asymptotically zero encoding rate and only square-root distance. Replacing the surface code with a high-rate, high-distance LDPC code could have major practical implications. First, fault-tolerance overhead (the ratio between the number of physical and logical qubits) could be reduced dramatically. Secondly, high-distance codes exhibit a very sharp decrease in the logical error rate: as the physical error probability crosses the threshold value, the amount of error suppression achieved by the code can increase by orders of magnitude even with a small reduction of the physical error rate. This feature makes high-distance LDPC codes attractive for near-term demonstrations which are likely to operate in the near-threshold regime. However, it was previously believed that outperforming the surface code for realistic noise models including memory, gate, and SPAM errors may require very large LDPC codes with more than 10,000 physical qubits [31].
Here we present several concrete examples of high-rate LDPC codes with a few hundred physical qubits equipped with a low-depth syndrome measurement circuit, an efficient decoding algorithm, and a fault-tolerant protocol for addressing individual logical qubits. These codes exhibit an error threshold close to 1%, show excellent performance in the near-threshold regime, and offer more than 10X reduction of the encoding overhead compared with the surface code. Hardware requirements for realizing our error correction protocols are relatively mild, as each physical qubit is coupled by two-qubit gates with only six other qubits. Although the qubit connectivity graph is not locally embeddable into a 2D grid, it can be decomposed into two planar degree-3 subgraphs. As we argue below, such qubit connectivity is well-suited for architectures based on superconducting qubits. Before stating our results, let us describe several must-have features for a quantum error-correcting code to be suitable for near-term experimental demonstrations and formally pose the problem addressed in this work.

2 Code selection criteria

In this work, we study the problem of realizing a fault-tolerant quantum memory with a small qubit overhead and a large code distance. Our goal is to construct a combination of the LDPC code, syndrome measurement circuitry, and the decoding (error correction) algorithms, suitable for a near-term demonstration, but also offering long-term utility, while taking into account the capabilities and limitations of the superconducting circuits quantum hardware. In other words, we seek to develop a practical error correction protocol. Our selection criteria reflect this goal.
We focus on encoding k  1 logical qubits into n data qubits and use c ancillary check qubits to measure the error syndrome. In total, the code relies on n + c physical qubits. The net encoding rate is therefore

k

r=

.

n+c

For example, the standard surface code architecture encodes k = 1 logical qubit into n = d2 data qubits for a distance-d code and uses c = n-1 check qubits for syndrome measurements. The net encoding rate is r  1/(2d2), which quickly
becomes impractical as one is forced to choose a large code distance, due to, for instance, the physical errors being close to the threshold value. In contrast, we seek a high-rate LDPC code with r  1/d2.

2

