arXiv:2309.01668v3 [cond-mat.soft] 17 Dec 2025

Non-equilibrium thermodynamics in driven macroscopic self-assembly
S. J. Thomson1,2 and J.-W. Barotta2, and D. M. Harris2 1School of Engineering Mathematics and Technology, University of Bristol, Ada Lovelace Building, University Walk, Bristol, BS8 1TW and 2School of Engineering, Center for Fluid Mechanics,
Brown University, 184 Hope Street, Providence, RI 02912
(Dated: December 18, 2025)
1

Equilibrium statistical mechanics provides a robust framework for characterizing phase transitions in systems whose microsopic dynamics are time-reversible. Efforts to develop and validate theoretical frameworks for time-irreversible, nonequilibrium systems are constrained by experimental data that capture only partial measurements of the system dynamics. We herein overcome this limitation using a tunable macroscopic platform for non-equilibrium physics: millimetric spheres bound by capillary attractions at the fluid interface and driven out of equilibrium by a field of supercritical Faraday waves. The external driving induces correlated fluctuations in the particle trajectories, which in turn excite structural rearrangements between distinct metastable cluster topologies. By tracking all microstate transitions experimentally, we directly measure a nonzero entropy production rate reflecting broken detailed balance and quantifying the system's departure from equilibrium. The measured stochastic dynamics are in quantitative agreement with a many-body active Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model, thus establishing a bridge to a wider class of athermal, self-propelled systems at the microscale. These results invite parallel studies of non-equilibrium selfassembly kinetics using active colloids or passive particles immersed in bacterial baths whose dynamics and irreversibility are likewise governed by correlated active forces and tunable inter-particle interactions.
Non-equilibrium processes abound in nature and technology from the development and self-organization of living matter [1, 2] to the directed assembly of colloids [3Ł5] and the coordinated behaviour of macroscopic robot collectives [6, 7]. An important aspect of these and myriad other systems in physics and biology are phase transitions, wherein otherwise identical constituents of the system can occupy, and transition between, different microstate configurations. As a consequence of time-reversal symmetry, in equilibrium statistical mechanics these transitions follow the directions of steepest ascent and descent in a free-energy landscape [8, 9]. For non-equilibrium systems whose dynamics break time-reversal symmetry, this framework no longer applies and hence attention has turned to developing a corresponding theory for phase transitions out of equilibrium [10, 11]. However many microscopic or biological systems that have inspired the development of such frameworks are limited to partial experimental observations [12, 13] or contain hidden degrees of freedom that are not readily measured, rendering experimental validation difficult and often limited
2

