arXiv:2310.06759v2 [math.MG] 22 May 2024

PLANAR APERIODIC TILE SETS: FROM WANG TILES TO THE HAT AND SPECTRE MONOTILES
TINKA BRUNEAU AND MICHAEL F. WHITTAKER
Abstract. A brief history of planar aperiodic tile sets is presented, starting from the Domino Problem proposed by Hao Wang in 1961. We provide highlights that led to the discovery of the TaylorÙSocolar aperiodic monotile in 2010 and the Hat and Spectre aperiodic monotiles in 2023. The Spectre tile is an amazingly simple monotile; a single tile whose translated and rotated copies tile the plane but only in a way that lacks any translational periodicity. We showcase this breakthrough discovery through the 60+ years that aperiodic tile sets have been considered.
1. Introduction
In 1961, Hao Wang asked if it is possible to algorithmically determine whether translated copies of a finite set of marked square tiles can tile the plane. This became known as the Domino Problem. As a first attack on the Domino Problem, Wang posed his Fundamental Conjecture: a set of Wang tiles either tiles the plane with translational periodicity or does not tile. The other possibility is a set of tiles that can form a tiling of the plane but always without any translational periodicity, such a tile set is called aperiodic.
Robert Berger found a counterexample to Wang's Fundamental Conjecture by finding an aperiodic tile set with 20,426 tiles. This proved undecidability of the Domino Problem. After finding such a set of tiles, the search was on for the minimal size of such a set. Emmanuel Jeandel and Micha´el Rao recently proved that an aperiodic set of Wang tiles must have at least 11 tiles and gave an example of such a tile set. We provide pictures of all tilings mentioned in the introduction throughout the article and the reader is invited to look ahead to get a feeling for these tile sets and their tilings.
Wang tiles are always squares, but what if we allow tiles to come in arbitrary shapes and allow tiles to be rotated and reflected? In the 1970s, both Sir Roger Penrose and Robert Ammann found aperiodic tile sets with just two tiles, now commonly referred to as the Penrose and AmmannÙ Beenker tiles, respectively. This left open the aperiodic monotile problem: Is there a single tile that can tile the plane but only in a way that forbids translational periodicity?
Two early attempts found monotiles that use overlaps to force aperiodicity. While these are not our focus, they are very interesting both historically and from the standpoint of aperiodic order. The first of these was Gummelt's covering of the Penrose tiling by a single decorated decagon [10]. Gummelt's overlapping tile was really the first mono-cluster, and provided the first evidence that a monotile could be possible. The second was Penrose's (1 +  + 2)-tiling [2, 14]. This was originally described as a single hexagon with a smaller hexagon and half-hexagons inscribed in its interior. The matching rules required overlapping hexagons to form the same type of hexagons as at the larger scale. An excellent discussion of both of these tiling can be found in [5].
We'd like to thank Michael Baake, Kevin Brix, Felix Flicker, Robbert Fokkink, Franz Ga´hler, Craig Kaplan, Jan MazaÇc and Jamie Walton for excellent comments and suggestions on early drafts. This paper was written while the second author was a guest at the Fields Institute, and he thanks them for their hospitality and exceptional research environment.
1

2

TINKA BRUNEAU AND MICHAEL F. WHITTAKER

In a breakthrough result of Joan Taylor in 2010 [20], the first connected and completely geometrically defined monotile was discovered, but the tile is not simply connected. That is, the tile is not a topological disc. Taylor joined forces with Joshua Socolar to introduce their tile to the mathematical community [18, 19]. The original formulation of the TaylorÙSocolar tile was described as a decorated hexagon with certain matching rules between both neighbouring and next to neighbouring tiles, and the tiling requires a reflected tile.
In March 2023, Dave Smith, Craig Kaplan, Joseph Myers, and Chaim Goodman-Strauss found a simply connected monotile that they called the Hat [16]. Amazingly, the Hat is a simple polygonal shape and is entirely geometric, in the sense that no additional matching rules on how tiles are allowed to meet are required to enforce aperiodicity. What's more, in the article, a beautiful proof of aperiodicity was used to show that there are, in fact, an uncountable number of tiles in the Hat family that are also simply connected monotiles. The tiling requires a reflected version of the Hat. This left open the question of whether a simply connected and geometric solution to the monotile problem without reflections is possible.
In a marvellous stroke of insight, Smith, Kaplan, Myers, and Goodman-Strauss realised that a member of the Hat family could also be used to tile the plane without using a reflected copy of the tile [17]. The Spectre aperiodic monotile was discovered. The Spectre is in the family of Hat tilings, but was one of the singular members that allowed periodic tilings. The authors realised that forbidding the reflected tile still allowed tilings of the plane, but all such tilings lack translational periodicity. Thus, the Spectre provides a remarkable solution to the aperiodic monotile problem!

2. Tiles, tilings, and their properties
In this article, we restrict ourselves to two dimensional tilings. We mostly follow the language and terminology defined in Baake and Grimm's Aperiodic Order [5], which is highly recommended to the interested reader. The second main reference on general tiling theory is the book of Gru´nbaum and Shephard [9], which contains an excellent introduction to Wang tiles and aperiodic tile sets.
We begin with the building blocks of a tiling. A prototile is a labelled subset of R2 that is equal to the closure of its interior. This just means that there are no dangling bits hanging from the tiles; in fact, one should probably just think of labelled polygons. In addition, we often allow decorations of the prototiles, like edge markings that must match, arrows to determine tile orientation, or lines that must continue across tile edges. Often, but not always, these decorations can be realised by puzzle like bumps and dents in the tile edges. We'll see examples of this soon.
Let P be a finite set of prototiles and G a subgroup of the isometry group of R2. A tiling of R2 (the plane) is a countable collection of tiles T = {ti | i  N} such that:
ñ ti =  ñ p for some p  P and  in G;
ñ ti = R2;
iN
ñ interior(ti)  interior(tj) =  if i = j.
Let's take a minute to understand the definition. The first bullet point specifies that all tiles in the tiling must be isometric copies of prototiles (i.e., some composition of a translation, rotation and/or reflection of a prototile), where the group G specifies the exact subset of isometries we allow for a given prototile set. Here we are thinking of the prototiles as actually sitting in the plane, so that we can move them about to form a tiling. In this article, G will always be the

