arXiv:2407.10913v2 [hep-lat] 28 Apr 2026

Hybrid calculation of hadronic vacuum polarization in muon g-2 to 0.48%
A. Boccaletti1,2, Sz. Borsanyi1, A. Cotellucci2, M. Davier3, Z. Fodor4,5,1,2,6,7,, F. Frech1, A. GÇerardin8, D. Giusti2,9, A.Yu. Kotov2, L. Lellouch8, Th. Lippert2, A. Lupo8, B. Malaescu10, S. Mutzel8,11, A. Portelli12,13, A. Risch1, M. Sjo´8, F. Stokes2,14, K.K. Szabo1,2, B.C. Toth1,2, G. Wang8, Z. Zhang3
1 Department of Physics, University of Wuppertal, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany 2 Ju´lich Supercomputing Centre, Forschungszentrum Ju´lich, D-52428 Ju´lich, Germany 3 IJCLab, UniversitÇe Paris-Saclay et CNRS/IN2P3, Orsay, 91405, France 4 Physics Department, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA 5 Institute for Computational and Data Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA 6 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Eo´tv´os University, H-1117 Budapest, Hungary 7 University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA 8 Aix Marseille Univ, UniversitÇe de Toulon, CNRS, CPT, IPhU, Marseille, France 9 Fakult´at fu´r Physik, Universit´at Regensburg, 93040, Regensburg, Germany 10 LPNHE, Sorbonne UniversitÇe, UniversitÇe Paris CitÇe, CNRS/IN2P3, Paris, 75252, France 11 Laboratoire de Physique de l'Ecole Normale SupÇerieure, Mines Paris - PSL, CNRS, Inria, PSL Research University, Paris, France 12 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3JZ, United Kingdom 13 RIKEN Center for Computational Science, Kobe 650-0047, Japan 14 Special Research Centre for the Subatomic Structure of Matter, Department of Physics, University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia
1

For fifty years, the standard model of particle physics has been hugely successful in describing subatomic phenomena. In the last quarter century, this was challenged by a mismatch between its predictions and precision measurements of the anomalous magnetic moment of the muon, aç. This disagreement was eventually reconciled. First, through a determination in an ab-initio lattice calculation [1] of the most uncertain theoretical contribution: the leading-order hadronic vacuum polarization, açLO-HVP, and subsequently by experimental results [2] and updates of the reference standard-model predictions using lattice results for aLçO-HVP [3]. Here, we present a new calculation for this crucial quantity, obtaining açLO-HVP = 715.1(2.5)(2.3)[3.4] æ 10-10. This reduces the uncertainty by a factor of 1.6 compared to our earlier computation [1]. We adopt a hybrid approach that includes a small, long-distance contribution from experiments in a low-energy regime where they all agree. Our approach combines the strengths of experimental and lattice data in different energy ranges, achieving better precision than with either alone. Our lattice QCD simulations are performed on finer lattices than in Ref. [1], allowing for an even more accurate continuum extrapolation. Combined with the calculations of the other standard-model contributions summarized in Ref. [3], our result leads to a prediction that differs from the recent measurement of aç [4] by only 0.5 standard deviations. This provides a remarkable validation of the standard model to 11 digits.
The muon is a short-lived elementary particle with spin 1/2 and a mass 207 times larger than that of the electron. Both particles create a magnetic field around them, characterized by a magnetic dipole moment. This moment is proportional to the spin and charge of the particle, and inversely proportional to twice its mass. Dirac's relativistic quantum mechanics predicts that the constant of proportionality, gç, known as the LandÇe factor, is precisely 2. Relativistic quantum field theory introduces additional small corrections induced not only by all particles and interactions of the Standard Model (SM), but also potentially by yet undiscovered ones. Because muons are more massive than electrons, quantum corrections associated with heavy particles are generically much larger for the former than for the latter [5]. This increased sensitivity to the effects of possible unknown particles is the reason for the current focus on the muon. The corrections to gç are commonly called the anomalous magnetic moment and are quantified as aç = (gç - 2)/2.
When calculating aç, the uncertainty comes almost exclusively from the strong interaction, described in the SM by quantum chromodynamics (QCD). In particular, the dominant source of uncertainty comes from hadronic vacuum polarization (HVP) at leading order in the fine-structure constant (LO-HVP). More generally, HVP induces a modification in the propagation of a virtual photon in the vacuum, caused by the strong interaction.
Here we present a calculation of this LO-HVP contribution to aç (aLçO-HVP) with unprecedented accuracy. To that end we apply numerical lattice quantum field theory techniques that allow QCD predictions to be made in the highly nonlinear regime that is relevant here. Mathematically, QCD is a generalized version of quantum electrodynamics (QED). However, QCD predicts physical phenomena that are drastically different from those described by QED. The Euclidean Lagrangian for a quark of mass m and charge q (in units of the positron charge, e), subject to strong and electromagnetic interactions, can be written as L = 1/(4e2)FçFç + 1/(2g2) Tr GçGç + ₤[ç(ç + iqAç + iGç) + m], where Fç = çA - Aç, Gç = çG -Gç +i[Gç, G] and g is the QCD coupling constant. The fermionic quark fields  have an additional "colour" index in QCD, which runs from 1 to 3. Different "flavours" of quarks are represented by independent fermionic fields, with different masses and charges. In QED, the gauge potential Aç is a real valued field, whereas in QCD, Gç is a 3æ3 traceless Hermitian matrix field acting in "colour" space. In the present work we include both QCD and QED as well as four nondegenerate quark flavours (up, down, strange and charm) in a fully-dynamical, staggered-fermion formulation. We also consider the tiny contribution of the bottom quark. Its error is subdominant, and we repeat the treatment of our earlier analysis [1].
To calculate the LO-HVP contribution to aç, we start with the zero-three-momentum, two-point function of the quark electromagnetic current in Euclidean time t [6]. In this so-called time-momentum
2

