arXiv:2412.21171v4 [quant-ph] 8 Sep 2025

Quantum error correction near the coding theoretical bound
Daiki Komoto and Kenta Kasai
Institute of Science Tokyo.
Contributing authors: komoto.d.cdb8@m.isct.ac.jp; kenta@ict.eng.isct.ac.jp;
1 Abstract
Recent progress in quantum computing has enabled systems with tens of reliable logical qubits, built from thousands of noisy physical qubits [1]. However, many impactful applications demand quantum computations with millions of logical qubits [2], necessitating highly scalable quantum error correction. In classical information theory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [3] can approach channel capacity efficiently [4]. Yet, no quantum error-correcting codes with efficient decoding have been shown to approach the hashing bound--a fundamental limit on quantum capacity--despite decades of research [5],[6],[7]. Here, we present quantum LDPC codes that not only approach the hashing bound but also allow decoding with computational cost linear in the number of physical qubits. This breakthrough paves the way for large-scale, fault-tolerant quantum computation. Combined with emerging hardware that manages many qubits, our approach brings quantum solutions to important real-world problems significantly closer to reality.
2 Introduction
Recent progress in quantum computing has enabled the development of systems with tens of reliable logical qubits, built from thousands of noisy physical qubits [1]. Nonetheless, many essential applications targeted by quantum computers demand quantum computations that involve millions or even more logical qubits [2]. This creates a pressing need for highly efficient quantum error correction methods that can accommodate a vast number of logical qubits.
1

A classical error-correcting code defined by a sparse parity-check matrix is called a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. It is known that LDPC codes achieve error correction performance that approaches the channel capacity with computational complexity proportional to the code length in classical error correction [3].
Protograph codes [8] are LDPC codes whose parity-check matrices are constructed using a protograph matrix composed of permutation matrices (PM) as submatrices. A subclass of these codes includes quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [9], which are constructed using circulant permutation matrices (CPMs), and APM-LDPC (affine permutation matrices) codes [10], which are constructed using APMs. Similar to unstructured LDPC codes, protograph codes are also known for their excellent error correction performance.
Short cycles are particularly known to cause a high error floor. The error floor of LDPC codes refers to a phenomenon where the error rate does not decrease as rapidly as expected with decreasing noise levels, especially in the high-fidelity regime. In computational error correction, extremely low error rates are required, making it critically important to address the error floor phenomenon. It is known that the girth (the length of the shortest cycle) of QC-LDPC matrices is upper-bounded by 12 [9]. However, APM-LDPC matrices can exceed this upper bound on girth [10, 11].
LDPC codes are typically defined over a binary field. Certain types of LDPC codes are known to achieve further improvements in error-correcting performance by applying extensions to non-binary finite fields [12], although this increases the computational complexity required for decoding.
Determining the maximum rate at which information can be reliably transmitted through a quantum channel remains one of the most challenging problems in quantum information theory. Specifically, this concerns the concept of quantum channel capacity, which quantifies the maximum rate of quantum information that can be transmitted while preserving its integrity. Even for simple and widely studied noise models, such as the depolarizing channel, the exact value of this capacity is unknown. The most basic lower bound, known as the hashing bound or the LSD theorem [5Ł7], is particularly notable. For Pauli channels, this bound has a straightforward expression and can be achieved using random stabilizer codes. It is recognized as a fundamental benchmark for evaluating quantum error correction performance.
The Calderbank-Shor-Steane (CSS) codes [13, 14] are a class of quantum errorcorrecting codes constructed from a pair of classical error-correcting codes. CSS codes are derived from two classical codes with parity-check matrix pairs (HX , HZ) that satisfy the orthogonality condition HX HZT = 0. Each matrix represents the paritycheck matrix of one of the classical codes in the pair.
CSS codes defined by orthogonal sparse parity-check matrix pairs are referred to as LDPC-CSS codes. Since LDPC-CSS codes are decoded using algorithms similar to those for classical LDPC codes, they are particularly promising for practical application in large-scale quantum computers. Algebraic construction methods allow for the straightforward construction of orthogonal pairs of QC-LDPC matrices [15].
Kasai et al. [16] successfully constructed finite field extended orthogonal non-binary QC-LDPC matrix pairs from the orthogonal QC-LDPC matrix pairs proposed by
2

