The DESI DR1/DR2 evidence for dynamical dark energy is biased by low-redshift supernovae
Lu Huang,1,  Rong-Gen Cai,2,  and Shao-Jiang Wang1, 3,  1Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100190, China 2Institute of Fundamental Physics and Quantum Technology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China
3Asia Pacific Center for Theoretical Physics (APCTP), Pohang 37673, Korea
Recently, a 3  4 preference for dynamical dark energy has been reported by the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) collaboration, which has inspired hot debates on new physics or systematics. In this paper, we reveal that this preference is significantly biased by an external low-redshift supernova (low-z SN) sample, which was combined with the Dark Energy Survey SN program (DES-SN) in their Year-Five data release (DESY5). Using the intercept in the SN magnitude-distance relation as a diagnostic for systematics, we find not only large dispersions but also a large discrepancy in the low-z SN sample when compared to the high-z DES-SN sample within the single DESY5 compilation, in contrast to the uniform behavior found in the PantheonPlus data. Correcting for this low-z systematics with or without including the cosmic microwave background data can largely reduce the preference for dynamical DE to be less than 2. Therefore, the DESI preference for dynamical DE is biased by some unknown systematics in the low-z SN sample.

arXiv:2502.04212v5 [astro-ph.CO] 17 Jul 2025

I. INTRODUCTION
The standard Lambda-cold-dark-matter (CDM) model, consisting of radiation, baryonic matter, cold dark matter, and a cosmological constant  in a spatially flat, isotropic and homogeneous Universe with primordial perturbations provided by a nearly scale-invariant adiabatic Gaussian random scalar field, has passed a wide variety of cosmological tests [1ｭ9]. Despite its great success over past two decades, a few tensions [10] including the  5 Hubble tension [11ｭ15], a  3 S8 tension [16, 17], and a  4  tension [18] as well as a  3 H0 tension [19] seem to breakdown this concordant model. In particular, whether the cosmological constant  should be replaced by a dynamical dark energy (DE) to drive the late-time acceleration would call for special cautions.
As one of the stage-III surveys, the Dark Energy Survey (DES) explores the properties of dark matter and DE with unprecedented precision and accuracy through multiple probes like Type Ia supernovae (SNe Ia), weak lensings, large-scale structures, galaxy clusters [20ｭ22]. As the most updated Stage IV survey, the recent release of the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument (DESI) for baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) [23ｭ25] together with full 5-year photometrically classified 1635 SNe Ia (DESSN), after combined with previous external 194 low-z SNe Ia (low-z SN) in the DES Year-Five Data Release (DESY5) [26, 27], have triggered heated debates on the existence of dynamical DE. Specifically, the joint constraint of cosmic microwave background (CMB) Planck data, DESI DR1 (Y1 BAO measurements), and DESY5 (low-z SN+DES-SN) compilation surprisingly favors a dynamical DE with phantom crossing, showing a 3.9
 huanglu@itp.ac.cn  caironggen@nbu.edu.cn  schwang@itp.ac.cn (corresponding author)

tension with the CDM model [23, 28]. A similar but weaker preference ( 2) [29] of dynamic DE is also achieved without the participation of DESI DR1 and DESY5. These hints for new physics have attracted significant interests in the community with subsequent numerous theoretical studies on different kinds of dynamical DE models, e.g. Refs. [30ｭ55].
In parallel with theoretical explanations, inconsistencies between recent new measurements (DESI DR1, DESY5) and previous high-quality measurements, such as SDSS BAO [5, 56] and PantheonPlus SNe [57ｭ63], have also been widely debated [64ｭ76]. For example, the combination of DESI LRG1 and LRG2 data is found to be the key driver for the preference of dynamical DE [23, 44, 66, 69, 70]. Nevertheless, these two data exhibit mild tension with SDSS BAO [5] for unknown reasons. What's more, by comparing the mean magnitudedistance residuals between PantheonPlus and DESY5, Ref. [74] found a  0.04 - 0.05 magnitude (mag.) difference in the overlapping regime, indicating unidentified SNe systematics in DESY5 (see, however, Ref. [77]). Correcting this offset would reduce the preference for dynamical DE, bringing cosmological constraints of the corrected DESY5 back to CDM. Therefore, it cannot simply rule out the possibility of potential systematics in DESY5.
The low-z SN sample consists of 194 SNe Ia, including 8 SNe Ia from the Carnegie Supernova Project (CSP) [78], 68 SNe Ia from the Center for Astrophysics (CfA) [79, 80], and 118 SNe Ia from the PanSTARRS Foundation Supernova Survey (Foundation) [81]. On the other hand, the PantheonPlus sample consists of 741 SNe Ia at low redshift z < 0.1, 184 of which are in common with the low-z SN sample of DESY5 compilation, that is, 118 SNe from Foundation, 59 SNe from CfA, and 7 SNe from CSP samples. Including the low-z SN sample in the DESY5 compilation with the least systematics control in cosmological analyses is controversial in practice. As highlighted in Refs. [26, 27], the spectroscopically con-

2

firmed low-z SN sample (different from the photometrically classified DES-SN in the observational method) is the most critical source of systematics due to a lack of homogeneity and complete calibrations. Specifically, the nuisance parameters ,  used to correct for SN color and stretch dependencies show significant discrepancies between low-z SN and DES-SN samples. Given that the properties and selection effects of the low-z sample still lack sufficient understanding, additional systematics checks are necessary.
In this paper, we first cross-compare DESI DR1 and DESY5 SNe with the previous high-quality SDSS eBOSS BAO and PantheonPlus SNe, and confirm that the key driver of dynamical DE is the additional external low-z SN sample in forming the DESY5 compilation. We then propose to diagnose the systematics of DESY5 and quantify its preference for dynamic DE through the dubbed aB consistency developed in Refs. [82, 83]. By performing simple corrections to DESY5, we find the fully de-biased DESY5, after combining with DESI DR1/DR2 regardless of CMB, shows no significant deviation from the CDM model. Therefore, it is too early to claim dynamical DE.
II. DATA AND METHOD
As indicated in Refs. [23, 28], different late-time observations seem to have different levels of support for the dynamical DE. To diagnose which dataset contributes the most to the preference for dynamical DE, we take all the high-quality DESI DR1 [23], DESY5 (low-z SN + DES-SN) [26, 27], SDSS eBOSS BAO [5], PantheonPlus [57ｭ63], and Planck CMB [4] into considerations for completed comparisons. The UNION3 compilation [84] is not included in this study as they have not released a Hubble diagram yet.
Similar to PantheonPlus SNe analysis, we construct the distance moduli residual vector of DESY5 SNe as D = msBtd - MB - ｵmodel, where standardized apparent magnitudes msBtd have already corrected for stretch, color, simulation bias (selection bias, Malmquist bias, and light curve fitting bias), and mass step effects. The likelihood is defined as -2 ln(L) = DT Cs-ta1t+systD . We adopt the commonly used built-in Planck CMB (plik TTTEEE + lowl + lowE + CMB lensing), SDSS eBOSS BAO (eight BAO-only data points), and PantheonPlus (local SNe at z < 0.01 are discarded) in MontePython [85], along with extra self-written DESI BAO and DESY5 likelihoods. In what follows, we perform the Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) on the w0waCDM model with Planck CMB + arbitrarily different combinations of BAO and SNe to locate the possible systematics direction.

III. ANALYSIS
A. Systematics identification
In the Appendix, we present all constraints of the w0waCDM model of this study in Tab. I and Tab. II. The Tab. I is visualized in the left panel Fig. 1 for their marginalized w0 - wa distributions, where the base preference for dynamical DE from Planck-CMB+eBOSSBAO+PantheonPlus is  1.7 (blue contour in the upper left), not significant yet. Either replacing the eBOSS BAO with DESI DR1 (green contour in the upper right) or the PantheonPlus SNe with DESY5 SNe (purple contour in the bottom left) would increase preferences to  2.5 and  2.9, respectively, but still not decisive to claim dynamical DE. In particular, when getting rid of the low-z SN sample, the significance drops from  2.9 to insignificant  1.1 (orange contour in the bottom left). Even though CMB+DESI DR1+DESY5 after both of the above replacements presents a more significant  3.5 preference (red contour in the bottom right), getting rid of the low-z SN sample would once again drop the significance from  3.5 back to  1.7 (orange dashed contour in the bottom right). On the contrary, both cases using low-z SNe (blue dot-dashed contours in the bottom row) prefer a deviation from the CDM model with a direction towards w0 > -1 and wa < 0. Therefore, a minor inconsistency emerges between low-z SNe and DES-SN samples.
To further separate the interference from different BAO data and reflect the underlying preference for dynamical DE from different SNe samples, we can solely use Planck CMB to calibrate low-z, DES-SN, and their combined (DESY5), respectively. The marginalized w0 - wa and H0 - MB distributions are shown in the right panel of Fig. 1. The purple w0 - wa contour of low-z SN samples shows a significant deviation and thus dominates the preference for dynamical DE in the blue DESY5 contour since the red DES-SN contour alone coincides perfectly with CDM ( 0.6). However, this low-z-dominated deviation is likely to be a mirage since its H0 - MB contour in the inset shows a rather weak constraint and irregular marginalized distribution, suggesting the multisample mixed low-z SNe does not have a consistent absolute magnitude MB. Hence, there are substantial systematics in the low-z SNe sample, which can be corrected with a method (3) detailed below in the next two subsections, as shown with black dashed contours in both Fig. 1 and its inset.

