arXiv:2504.16513v3 [math.DG] 16 May 2026

THE BRACKET OF THE EXCEPTIONAL LIE ALGEBRA E8
ANDREAS KOLLROSS
Abstract. We obtain an explicit formula for the bracket of the exceptional simple Lie algebra E8 based on triality and oct-octonions, following the Barton-Sudbery description of E8. Furthermore, we provide descriptions of the subalgebras E6 and E7 and prove an explicit formula for the 26-dimensional irreducible representation of F4.
1. Introduction
The exceptional Lie groups and Lie algebras G2, F4, E6, E7, E8 were first described by Wilhelm Killing [13, 6]. The exceptional Lie groups have since made many appearances in geometry, topology, and physics. However, to this day, they still remain somewhat elusive and mysterious.
Of the five exceptional Lie algebras g2, f4, e6, e7, e8 the 248-dimensional algebra e8 is the one with the highest dimension, and in many regards also the most difficult to deal with. For instance, since the lowest dimensional non-trivial representation is 248-dimensional, it is not a good option to use a matrix representation of e8, an approach that is viable for g2, which has a 7-dimensional faithful representation. For this and other reasons, the title of the article [11] refers to E8 as the "most exceptional Lie group" and it has even been argued in [11] that E8 could be called "the Monster of Lie theory".
Many different descriptions and constructions of e8 and other exceptional Lie algebras can already be found in the literature, as will be discussed below. It appears that exceptional Lie algebras and exceptional Lie groups have many different facets and thus there is no single one-size-fits-all approach to them, but different aspects of exceptional Lie groups lead to different constructions. Let us briefly review some known constructions of e8 and other Lie algebras, without aiming for completeness. Construction using a subalgebra. One may construct a model for g = e8 and other Lie algebras by starting with a subalgebra h of g. When restricted to h, the adjoint representation of g splits as g = h V , where the real vector space V is an adjoint representation of. In order to define the Lie bracket on g, one only has to define the bracket operation on V × V , since the bracket on h × h and on h ×V is already given. This approach is employed in the articles [1, 7, 15]. Various choices for the Lie algebra h lead to different models for g. It appears to be most natural and convenient to choose the subalgebra h to be of full rank.
Date: May 19, 2026. 2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 17B25, 17A35, 22E60, 53C35. Key words and phrases. exceptional Lie algebra, octonions.
1

2

A. KOLLROSS

In the articles [1] and [15], the subalgebra h = so16 is used. In [7] this procedure is applied to 14 different subalgebras of e8, but no explicit expressions for the Lie bracket are given. Construction using derivations. It is well known that the compact Lie group F4 can be identified with the automorphism group of an Albert algebra and thus its Lie algebra can be constructed as the algebra of derivations of this Albert algebra. The Tits construction [17], see also [8, 18], is an elegant and powerful generalization of this fact which also encompasses all the Lie algebras in Freudenthal's magic square. In [17] and [18], formulae are given for the brackets of these Lie algebras. It is remarked in [19]: "However, the definition of the Lie bracket given by Vinberg is not straightforward, and involves some quite complicated and unintuitive formulae.". In this paper, we will give a more natural and simpler explicit formula for the bracket of e8. Construction as a commutator algebra of matrix algebra. A relatively new approach was recently used in [19]. It imitates the construction of classical Lie algebras arising from associative algebras using the commutator of matrices as a Lie bracket. However, since the octonions, which are used to define the matrix algebra, are non-associative, one cannot use the usual matrix multiplication and the commutator given by it, but the matrix multiplication has to be modified.
In this paper, we present an explicit formula for the Lie bracket of the compact real form of e8, which has the potential to drastically simplify calculations with e8 in certain situations. Our approach is based on the first of the three construction methods discussed above, namely, the Lie algebra g = e8 is built from its subalgebra h = so8  so8. As pointed out above, it only remains to define the bracket of g = h V on V × V which we can do using a very a natural map, which is essentially just the multiplication in the algebra O  O. The appeal of this approach is that e8 is built from scratch using little more than octonionic multiplication and the resulting formula (4.1) is very concise, symmetric and intuitive.
Indeed, besides standard linear algebra operations, our formula only involves multiplication of Cayley numbers and the triality automorphism of so(8) (which is also described using octonionic multiplication). Our description is based on the decomposition
e8 = so(8)  so(8)  (O  O)3,
which is known as the Barton-Sudbery description of e8, see [4], by Baez [2]. In [3], Baez writes: "To emphasize the importance of triality, we can rewrite the Barton-
Sudbery description of e8 as
e8 = so(8)  so(8)  (V8  V8)  (S8+  S8+)  (S8-  S8-)
Here the Lie bracket is built from natural maps relating so(8) and its three 8-dimensional irreducible representations. In particular, so(8)  so(8) is a Lie subalgebra, and the first copy of so(8) acts on the first factor in V8  V8, S8+  S8+, and S8-  S8-, while the second copy acts on the second factor in each of these. This has a pleasant resemblance to the triality description of f4 [...]:
f4 = so(8)  V8  S8+  S8-."

