Magnetic structure of the kagome metal YbFe6Ge6 in view of Bragg diffraction
S. W. Lovesey
ISIS Facility, STFC, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0QX, United Kingdom Diamond Light Source, Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, Didcot, Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, United Kingdom Department of Physics, Oxford University, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
Abstract A material in possession of localized 4f-electron magnetism and delocalized 3delectron or band magnetism can often present enigmatic physical phenomena, and there has been a longstanding interest in the kagome metal YbFe6Ge6. More recently, because of an investigation of a so-called anomalous Hall effect, or topological Hall effect, and magnetic neutron Bragg diffraction [W. Yao et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 134, 186501 (2025)]. Iron moments in the two-dimensional layers of a hexagonal nuclear structure undergo collinear antiferromagnetic order below a temperature  500 K. The moments depart from the c axis in a spontaneous transition at  63 K to an orthorhombic structure. The magnetism of Yb ions appears to behave independently, which can be confirmed using resonant x-ray diffraction enhanced by a Fe atomic resonance. The inferred magnetic space group is a P(parity)T(time)symmetric (anti-inversion 1) collinear antiferromagnet. A linear magnetoelectric effect is allowed, as in historically important chromium sesquioxide, and Kerr rotation and the piezomagnetic effect are forbidden. Symmetry informed Bragg diffraction patterns for future x-ray and neutron experiments are shown to be rich in Fe magnetic properties of orthorhombic YbFe6Ge6, including space-spin correlations, anapoles and Dirac quadrupoles familiar in highTc ceramic superconductors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ternary intermetallics RFe6Ge6 crystallize in closely related structures that result from insertion of the R element within the Ge8 holes of the hexagonal host (P6/mmm) [1, 2, 3]. The magnetic properties are characterized by an antiferromagnetic ordering of the Fe sublattice above room temperature, and a stacking sequence + - + - along the hexagonal ch-axis depicted in Fig. 1. Iron moments align with this axis, and moment values range between 1.5 B and 2.2 B. There is zero molecular field on the R sites, and a concomitant low ordering temperature of the R sublattice caused by weak R­R interactions. In the compound of interest, YbFe6Ge6, resonant x-ray Bragg diffraction can distinguish Fe from Yb (Yb3+, 4f13) magnetism by tuning the x-ray energy to an Fe atomic resonance. Iron moments align with the kagome plane in a spontaneous transition at  63 K. They adopt a collinear antiferromagnetic structure depicted in Fig. 2, which belongs to an orthorhombic magnetic crystal class that includes anti-inversion (1) [4].
Anti-inversion among the elements of symmetry in a magnetic crystal class exerts a profound influence on diffraction amplitudes. For Bragg diffraction of x-rays enhanced by an

atomic resonance, charge and magnetic contributions to scattering amplitudes are in phase. Thus, there is no interference between charge and magnetic contributions to Bragg diffraction patterns gathered from a compound that presents a linear magnetoelectric effect. Moreover, coupling to helicity in primary x-rays is forbidden, with no difference in the intensity of a Bragg spot observed with opposite handed x-rays. In contrast, anti-inversion invariance imposes a 90o phase shift between nuclear and magnetic contributions in neutron scattering, and they are in quadrature in the intensity of a Bragg spot. A corollary is that the classical polarized neutron diffraction technique, using a departure from unity of the ratio of intensities for primary neutron beams of opposite polarization, is not available for magnetoelectric compounds. In their measurement of the magnetization distribution in Cr2O3, Brown et al. exploited spherical neutron polarimetry [5].
Our symmetry informed diffraction patterns for the resonant x-ray [6] and magnetic neutron [7] diffraction by YbFe6Ge6 expose electronic correlations that can be confronted with simulations. Dipoles in resonant x-ray diffraction at the atomic K edge using a parity-even event are proportional to the orbital angular momentum of the resonant ion. Quadrupoles are charge-like (non-magnetic Templeton-Templeton scattering) and their angular anisotropy reveals the spatial symmetry of the crystal environment. Parity-odd and time-odd (Dirac) multipoles are compulsory in our diffraction amplitudes, because Fe ions use acentric positions in the magnetic structure [6, 7]. Diffraction patterns for the resonant x-ray and magnetic neutron diffraction by Fe ions in YbFe6Ge6 are predicted to include anapoles (Dirac dipoles), space-spin correlations, and Dirac quadrupoles familiar in high-Tc ceramic superconductors [7]. To make the main body of the paper accessible many mathematical details reside in two appendices.
II. CRYSTAL AND MAGNETIC STRUCTURES
Iron moments in YbFe6Ge6 depart from the c axis in P6/m'm'm' (No. 191.241, Fig. 1 [8]) in a spontaneous transition at a temperature  63 K. Iron ions occupy acentric Wyckoff positions (8m) and (4l) in the orthorhombic space group Cm'mm, with cell dimensions a  8.828 Ĺ, b  5.097 Ĺ, c  8.092 Ĺ [4], and a basis {(1, 2, 0), (-1, 0, 0), (0, 0, 1)}relative to hexagonal (ah, bh, ch). Axial dipoles are always collinear in the (4l) position and allowed to be non-collinear in (8m). Reflection vectors for hexagonal and orthorhombic structures are labelled (Ho, Ko, Lo) and (h, k, l), respectively, with h = Ho + 2Ko, k = -Ho, l = Lo. The orthorhombic structure belongs to the centrosymmetric magnetic crystal class m'mm, and antiinversion (1) is among the elements of symmetry (identical to properties of 6/m'm'm' in Fig 1). Kerr rotation [9] and the piezomagnetic effect are not permitted by m'mm. In the following analysis of diffraction patterns, Fe multipoles are referred to orthogonal vectors labelled (, , ) derived from the orthorhombic unit cell depicted in Fig. 2. Table I contains the discrete symmetries of multipoles in amplitudes for resonant x-ray and magnetic neutron diffraction [6, 7].

