arXiv:2509.24583v3 [cs.LO] 26 Jun 2026

THE COMPLEXITY OF DEFINING AND SEPARATING FIXPOINT FORMULAE IN MODAL LOGIC
JEAN CHRISTOPH JUNG AND JDRZEJ KOLODZIEJSKI
Department of Computer Science, TU Dortmund University, Germany e-mail address: {jean.jung, jedrzej.kolodziejski}@cs.tu-dortmund.de
Abstract. Modal separability for modal fixpoint formulae is the problem to decide for two given modal fixpoint formulae ,  whether there is a modal formula  that separates them, in the sense that  |=  and  |= ¬. We study modal separability and its special case modal definability over various classes of models, such as arbitrary models, finite models, trees, and models of bounded outdegree. Our main results are that modal separability is PSpace-complete over words, that is, models of outdegree  1, ExpTime-complete over unrestricted and over binary models, and 2-ExpTime-complete over models of outdegree bounded by some d  3. Interestingly, this latter case behaves fundamentally different from the other cases also in that modal logic does not enjoy the Craig interpolation property over this class. Motivated by this we study also the induced interpolant existence problem as a special case of modal separability, and show that it is coNExpTime-complete and thus harder than validity in the logic. Besides deciding separability, we also provide algorithms for the effective construction of separators. Finally, we consider in a case study the extension of modal fixpoint formulae by graded modalities and investigate separability by modal formulae and graded modal formulae.
1. Introduction For given logics L, L+, the L-separability problem for L+ is to decide, given two L+-formulae , , whether there is an L-formula  that separates  and  in the sense that  |=  and  |= ¬. Obviously, a separator can only exist when  and  are inconsistent: if    is satisfiable in some model M, then M satisfies both any separator  (since  |= ) and its negation ¬ (since  |= ¬ and thus  |= ¬). Moreover, when L  L+ and ,  are inconsistent, we can take  or  as trivial separators, so the separability problem is nontrivial only when L cannot express the entire L+. Finally note that, for logics L+ closed under negation, L-separability generalizes the L-definability problem for L+: decide whether a given L+-formula is equivalent to an L-formula. Indeed,   L+ is equivalent to an L-formula iff  and ¬ are L-separable. Since separability is more general than definability, solving it requires an even better understanding of the logics under consideration.
Both definability and separability are central problems in logics, and both have a wide range of applications in computer science. On the one hand, L-definability in L+ is the essential question in understanding the expressive power of L within L+. On the other
Key words and phrases: Modal Logic, Fixpoint Logic, Separability, Interpolation, Definability.

2

J.CH. JUNG AND J. KOLODZIEJSKI

hand, some applications require understanding the more general notion of separability, as the following examples illustrate:
(1) In verification, a separator can be viewed as a property that separates good behavior, given by , from bad behavior, given by . In this case ,  are not necessarily logical formulae but could be other symbolic representations of sets of reachable states. The separator can sometimes act as an easy abstraction of the reachable states, for instance, in the construction of invariants. This view of verification in terms of separability has induced the study of separability in formal languages. As seminal work in this area let us only mention definability and separability of regular word languages by languages recognized by first-order logic [PZ16, Sch65, CH91].
(2) Separators can be used for explaining inconsistencies or, dually, entailment. For the latter, we assume a given entailment  |=  in a "complicated" logic L+. Then , ¬ are inconsistent and a separator  for , ¬ in an "easier" logic L can serve as a good explanation for the complicated entailment  |=  since  |=  and  |= . Example 1.1 below provides a more concrete example of this explanatory aspect. Separability has been recently studied for logics supporting counting or constants, respectively, by logics without this support [KTWZ25, JKW26].
(3) (Craig) interpolation can be thought of as an instance of separation, when the logic L is defined in terms of restricted signature. Craig interpolation is clearly central to computer science, see the upcoming volume [tCJK+ar] and references therein. Beyond this rather informal relation between interpolation and separation, there is also a strong technical connection, which we shall exploit later in the paper.
(4) In learning logical formulae from labeled data examples, one is given a knowledge base O, formulated in language L+, and sets P, N of positive and negative examples and asks whether there is a formula from a query language L fitting to the positive and negative examples. One possible formalization of fitting is to require from the fitting formula  that O |= (a), for every a  P , and O |= ¬(a), for all a  N [JLPW22]. Hence,  plays the role of a separator between positive and negative examples.
In this paper we study definability and separability of formulae of the modal µ-calculus µML [Pra81, Koz83] by formulae in propositional modal logic ML. µML is the extension of ML with fixpoints that encompasses virtually all specification languages such as PDL [FL79] and LTL and CTL [BK08]. Hence, when we ask for separators of given inconsistent µMLformulae ,  by an ML-formula, we ask the question whether the recursion in the form of fixpoints in ,  is crucial to explain their inconsistency. Let us consider an example.
Example 1.1. Consider the following properties P1, P2, P3 of vertex-labelled trees:
· P1: there is an infinite path starting in the root on which each point satisfies a; · P2: on every path there are only finitely many points satisfying a; · P3: on every path at most two points satisfy a.
The properties are expressible in µML but not in ML, and both of the pairs P1, P2 and P1, P3 are mutually exclusive, and hence P1 entails both the complement of P2 and of P3. The properties P1, P3 are separated by the ML-formula  = a  (a  a) which expresses that there is a path starting with three points satisfying a. As discussed in Point (2) above,  may serve as an intuitive explanation for the entailment of the complement of P3 from P1. On the other hand, separators are not guaranteed to exist, and indeed, no ML-formula separates P1, P2. The intuitive reason for this is that any ML-formula  only sees trees up to depth ||, and one can find two trees with properties P1, P2 which nonetheless look the same

