arXiv:2510.18868v1 [astro-ph.CO] 21 Oct 2025

Prepared for submission to JCAP
B-sure I: Minkowski functionals as robustness test for tensor-to-scalar ratio detection from CMB observations
Claudio Ranucci, Alessandro Carones, L´eo Vacher, Nicoletta Krachmalnicoff and Carlo Baccigalupi
International School for Advanced Studies (SISSA), Via Bonomea 265, Trieste 34136, Italy Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare (INFN) Sezione di Trieste, Via Valerio 2, Trieste 34127, Italy Institute for Fundamental Physics of the Universe (IFPU), Via Beirut 2, Trieste 34151, Italy
E-mail: cranucci@sissa.it
Abstract. The detection of primordial B-mode polarisation of the Cosmic Microwave Back-
ground (CMB) is a major observational goal in modern Cosmology, offering a potential window into inflationary physics through the measurement of the tensor-to-scalar ratio r. However, the presence of Galactic foregrounds poses significant challenges, possibly biasing the r estimate. In this study we explore the viability of using Minkowski functionals (MFs) as a robustness test to validate a potential r detection by identifying non-Gaussian features associated with foregrounds contamination. To do so, we simulate sky maps as observed by a LiteBIRD-like CMB experiment, with realistic instrumental and foregrounds modelling. The CMB B-mode signal is recovered through blind component separation algorithms, and the obtained (biased) value of r is used to generate Gaussian realisation of CMB signal. Their MFs are then compared with those computed on maps contaminated by foreground residual left by component separation, looking for a detection of non-Gaussianity. Our results demonstrate that, with the experimental configuration considered here, MFs can not be reliably adopted as a robustness test of an eventual r detection, as we find that in the majority of the cases MFs are not able to raise significant warnings about the non-Gaussianity induced by the presence of foreground residuals. In the most realistic and refined scenario we adopted, the test is able to flag non-Gaussianity in  26% of the simulations, meaning that there is no warning on the biased tensor-to-scalar ratio in  74% of cases. These results suggest that more advanced statistics than MFs must be considered to look for non-Gaussian signatures of foregrounds, in order to be able to perform reliable null tests in future CMB missions.
Keywords: gravitational waves and CMBR polarisation, non-gaussianity
*Corresponding author.

1 Introduction
Observations of the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) have played a crucial role in establishing the  Cold Dark Matter (CDM) as the standard cosmological model, providing insights into the origin of the structure, content and evolution of the Universe [1­3]. Most of the information regarding the early phases of the cosmic history has been extracted from temperature fluctuations; however, the fainter CMB polarisation field can still shed new light on the physics of the primordial Universe. A phase of exponential expansion which occurred 10-36 - 10-34 s after the Big Bang, called cosmic inflation [4­6], is canonically added to the standard model to explain some features of the hot Big Bang Cosmology. This expansion stretched quantum fluctuations of the metric (primordial gravitational waves, GWs) to cosmological scales, which are expected to produce a specific signature in the CMB polarisation: the primordial B-mode pattern [7­9]. Detecting primordial B-modes in CMB polarisation could enable the estimation of the amplitude of primordial gravitational waves, usually quantified by the tensor-to-scalar ratio parameter r [10], potentially providing experimental evidence for the inflationary scenario. Due to the faintness of such a signal (> 103 times weaker than temperature anisotropies), there is no direct evidence for primordial Bmodes yet, and current CMB experiments have placed tight constraints on their amplitude, finding r0.05 < 0.032 [11] and r0.01 < 0.028 (with a free-to-vary tensor spectral tilt) [12] at 95% confidence when evaluated at a pivot scale of 0.05 or 0.01 Mpc-1. At the same time, these experiments also observed that the power spectrum of primordial scalar perturbations, generated by inflation, is not exactly scale-independent, with the scalar spectral index ns-1  -0.035 (e.g., [2]). This measurement is compatible with several classes of inflationary models predicting r to be in the 10-3 - 10-2 range (see [13] and references therein).
The detection of primordial B-modes thus represents one of the main goals of future CMB missions. Their power spectrum is characterised by the presence of two different features: the reionisation bump (  10), associated with the scattering of CMB photons with free electrons released during cosmic reionisation, and the recombination bump (  80), which corresponds to the imprint of primordial tensor perturbations at the recombination epoch. The first can be measured only through full sky observations from space, while the second can be targeted by observing smaller regions of the sky from the ground [14­17].
Even though the only source of primordial large-scale B-modes are tensor fluctuations (at linear order), a practical measurement is complicated by several factors. The gravitational deflection of the background CMB photons by the cosmic large-scale structure creates coherent sub-degree distortions in the CMB, known as CMB lensing [18]. Through this mechanism, a fraction of the parity-even E-modes is transformed into parity-odd B-modes at intermediate and small scales [19]. Lensing B-modes have already been measured by SPTpol [20], ACTpol [21], PolarBear [22] and BICEP2/Keck [23] experiments. Diffuse Galactic emission is significantly polarised, and in particular components such as synchrotron radiation and thermal emission from dust grains produce B-modes with a significant amplitude. These two emission mechanisms are obviously prominent around the Galactic plane, but are also clearly detectable at higher latitudes [24]. Current measurements of Galactic emission demonstrate that the Galactic B-mode signal is dominant over the cosmological signal on all scales [25­28]. At the minimum of polarised Galactic thermal dust and synchrotron, around 80 GHz, their B-mode signal represents an effective tensor-toscalar ratio with amplitude larger than the sensitivity targeted by future CMB experiments, even in the cleanest regions of the sky [29].
­2­

