arXiv:2511.00622v2 [hep-th] 10 Feb 2026

Prepared for submission to JHEP
An algebra for covariant observers in de Sitter space
Bin Chen1,2,3 Jie Xu2 1Institute of Fundamental Physics and Quantum Technology, &School of Physical Science and Technology, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315211, China 2School of Physics, Peking University, No.5 Yiheyuan Rd, Beijing 100871, P. R. China 3Center for High Energy Physics, Peking University, No.5 Yiheyuan Rd, Beijing 100871, P. R. China E-mail: chenbin1@nbu.edu.cn, jiexu@stu.pku.edu.cn
Abstract: In d-dimensional de Sitter spacetime, consistency of the perturbative expansion necessitates imposing all second-order gravitational constraints associated with the SO(1, d) isometry group, rather than restricting to the R × SO(d - 1) subgroup, to address linearization instability [1]. Since generic de Sitter isometries do not preserve a fixed static patch, these constraints cannot be implemented within a fixed local algebra. In this paper, we develop a framework that consistently imposes all SO(1, d) constraints while incorporating multiple observers on arbitrary timelike geodesics. This is achieved by introducing the concept of covariant observer, whose geodesic transforms covariantly under the isometry group. Upon quantization, the observer is described by a superposition of geodesics, with the associated static patches fluctuating, providing a quantum reference frame L2(SO(1, d)). We realize this structure in an action model in which a particle carries a set of conserved charges, each one corresponding to a generator of de Sitter isometry group, which parametrize its geodesic and upon quantization lead to a fluctuating geodesic.
Inspired by the timelike tube theorem, we propose that the algebra of observables accessible to an covariant observer is generated by all degrees of freedom within its fluctuating static patch, including quantum field modes and other observers, which are treated as part of the matter system. Imposing the SO(1, d) constraints yields a gauge-invariant algebra that takes the form of an averaged modular crossed product algebra over static patches and configurations of other geodesics, thereby generalizing the notion of a local algebra associated with a fixed region to that of a fluctuating region. We show this algebra is of type II by explicitly constructing a faithful normal trace, leading to an observerdependent notion of von Neumann entropy. For semiclassical states, by imposing a UV cutoff in QFT and proposing a quantum generalization of the first law, we demonstrate the agreement between the algebraic and generalized entropies.

Contents

1 Introduction

1

2 Geodesics in dS2

6

2.1 Isometry action and reference frames

7

2.2 Causal contact between geodesics

8

3 Algebra for covariant observers

10

3.1 Algebra for a single covariant observer

10

3.2 An action modeling the covariant observer

13

3.3 Algebra for multiple covariant observers

15

3.4 Representation on a physical Hilbert space

17

4 Equality of algebraic and generalized entropy

19

4.1 The von Neumann entropy for semiclassical states

19

4.2 Impose a UV cutoff

21

4.3 Quantum first law for the cosmological horizon

21

5 Algebra in higher dimensions

24

6 Conclusion and discussion

26

1 Introduction
As classical general relativity is a generally covariant theory with diffeomorphisms as gauge symmetries, any physical observable should be relationally defined, that is, one chooses a dynamical reference frame and then describes all other degrees of freedom relative to this frame in a gauge-invariant fashion [2]. Treating diffeomorphism as gauge symmetry also presents a fundamental challenge for quantum gravity (QG), and has led to several important insights. In particular, imposing the second-order constraints associated with the boost symmetry within the linearized theory has been shown to intrinsically regularize entanglement entropy, without the need to introduce an explicit ultraviolet (UV) regulator [3­5]. 1
The ultraviolet divergence of entanglement entropy in quantum field theory arises from infinitely many entangled modes across the boundary of a local region. This divergence is reflected in the universal type III1 nature of the associated observable algebras [7­12], which lack a well-defined trace and therefore preclude an intrinsic definition of algebraic entropy [13, 14]. This algebraic structure persists in semiclassical quantum gravity, namely quantum field theory in curved spacetime, and underlies the difficulty of defining entropy in gravitational settings.
A concrete manifestation of this III1 structure arises in AdS/CFT holography [15, 16]. The III1 algebra emerges from the large N limit of the boundary algebra of single-trace operators in one
1For an excellent review, see [6].
­1­

