arXiv:2512.07131v2 [quant-ph] 9 Mar 2026

A manufacturable surface code architecture for spin qubits with fast transversal logic
Jason D. Chadwick, Willers Yang, Joshua Viszlai, and Frederic T. Chong University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA
{jchadwick, willers, jviszlai, ftchong}@uchicago.edu

Abstract--Spin qubits in silicon quantum dot arrays are a promising quantum computation platform for long-term scalability due to their small qubit footprint and compatibility with advanced semiconductor manufacturing. However, spin qubit devices face a key architectural bottleneck: the large physical footprint of readout components relative to qubits prevents a dense layout where all qubits can be measured simultaneously, complicating the implementation of quantum error correction. This challenge is offset by the platform's unique rapid shuttling capability, which can be used to transport qubits to distant readout ports. In this work, we explore the design constraints and capabilities of spin qubits in silicon and propose the SNAQ (Shuttling-capable Narrow Array of spin Qubits) surface code architecture, which relaxes the 1:1 readout-to-qubit assumption by leveraging spin shuttling to time-multiplex ancilla qubit initialization and readout. Our analysis shows that, given sufficiently high (experimentally demonstrated) qubit coherence times, SNAQ delivers an orders-of-magnitude reduction in chip area per logical qubit. Additionally, by using a denser grid of physical qubits, SNAQ enables fast transversal logic for short-distance logical operations, achieving over 10× improvement in local logical clock speed while still supporting global operations via lattice surgery. This translates to a 3.2-5.7× improvement in key Adder and Lookup fault-tolerant subroutines. Our work pinpoints critical hardware metrics and provides a compelling path toward high-performance fault-tolerant computation on near-term-manufacturable spin qubit arrays.
I. INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1. (a) Depiction of a possible implementation of a 7-dot-wide array of quantum dots, similar to devices fabricated by industrial and academic groups [26]­[30]. Electrons (black) are held in place at the plunger gates (light gray) and can interact with their neighbors or shuttle to adjacent plungers by manipulating the voltages on the barrier gates (orange). Singleelectron transistors (green) allow for qubit readout on the two sides of the array. (b) SNAQ achieves similar performance to baselines while improving chip area efficiency and readout component efficiency per logical qubit. (c) SNAQ avoids the downside of a longer syndrome extraction cycle by enabling transversal CNOTs (tCNOTs), achieving significantly faster logical clock speeds compared to lattice-surgery-based approaches.

Scaling quantum computers up to the million-qubit processors needed to enable powerful applications [1]­[5] is an immense architectural challenge. Spin qubits in silicon quantum dot arrays are a promising candidate for large-scale quantum computing, primarily due to their small footprint (on the order of 100 × 100 nm per qubit) and their compatibility with existing advanced semiconductor fabrication techniques [6]­[11]. However, the small footprint that makes spin qubits attractive creates a fundamental architectural challenge: physical readout components, such as a single-electron transistor (SET) or single-electron box (SEB), require large reservoirs and ohmic contacts that are many times the size of a quantum dot [12]­[17]. This makes it difficult to build a dense array of dots while dedicating a unique readout component to each qubit, instead incentivizing asymmetric fixed-width arrays as shown in Figure 1(a). On the other hand, spin qubits also offer the unique and compelling capability of extremely fast spin shuttling between quantum dots [18], [19], which can enable novel shuttling-based hardware layouts that can overcome the readout bottleneck [20]­[25]. Shuttling comes with a cost,

though. Qubits accumulate errors proportional to the distance shuttled, making it crucial to minimize shuttling distance when possible.
Previous spin qubit architecture proposals have addressed these challenges by introducing sparser arrays, creating large interior spaces to fit the needed components, but at the cost of a large shuttling overhead required to enable the dense 2D qubit connectivity needed for error correction. In this work, instead of designing an entirely new hardware layout, we consider the proven design of a fixed-width, limited-readout array [26]­[29], posing the central question: can we efficiently run the surface code in this constrained geometry by sacrificing measurement parallelism in exchange for a denser qubit array?
We propose a hardware-aware surface code architecture named SNAQ (Shuttling-capable Narrow Array of spin Qubits) that leverages fast spin shuttling to overcome the limited readout capabilities in silicon quantum dot hardware. We show that for sufficiently low idle error rates demonstrated by existing spin qubit hardware, the initialization and mea-

1

the idle error restricts the lowest achievable logical error rates, our method shows competitive performance against baselines for algorithmically relevant error rates. · We demonstrate through simulation that SNAQ enables low-latency transversal CNOTs (tCNOTs) for local multiqubit gates, creating a two-tiered latency hierarchy between fast-local tCNOTs and slow-global lattice surgery. · We perform a thorough performance evaluation, showing that SNAQ can achieve over 10× faster logical clock speed. This translates to 57-84% reduced cost for key fault-tolerant primitives, enabling an estimated 2.4-4.2× improvement in resource estimates for large-scale factoring algorithms.

II. BACKGROUND
In this section, we explain the components and terminology of silicon quantum dot devices and provide some high-level background on quantum error correction and the surface code. We encourage the reader to refer to Ref. [31] for a more thorough background on spin qubits and to Refs. [32], [33] for more information on the surface code.

Fig. 2. Proposed SNAQ (Shuttling-capable Narrow Array of spin Qubits) architecture. (a) For ease of visualization, we translate from the specific chip components in Figure 1 to the abstract components we will use in the rest of the paper. Depicted is a layout of a distance-5 surface code patch on a 7-dotwide array. Initialization and readout components (green) are only available on the edges of the array. Data qubits (dark gray) are interleaved with channels of empty dots (light gray) used to shuttle surface code ancilla qubits from edge to edge in the direction of the black arrows. Surface code X and Z stabilizers (blue and pink) are shown behind the array, supported on the data qubits. (b) A logical 1 × N layout of surface codes in a narrow array. (c) Possible design of a fully scalable architecture consisting of loops of SNAQ channels, with large spaces in between to allow for integration of control wires and readout.
surement of physical qubits can be serialized with manageable impact on the logical performance of the surface code. This creates a significantly denser qubit array, which reduces the required amount of spin shuttling for error correction and enables the transversal CNOT for short-range logical multiqubit gates, delivering logical clock speed improvements and greater potential parallelism. This work makes the following main contributions:
· We identify and characterize the qubit-to-readout area mismatch as a key design challenge for scalable spin qubit architectures.
· We propose SNAQ, a novel surface code architecture that leverages fast spin shuttling to time-multiplex syndrome extraction and overcome this bottleneck in near-termmanufacturable arrays.
· We analyze the physical parameters for this new design with detailed circuit-level simulations, pinpointing the readout density  and the qubit idle error rate pid as the most critical hardware metrics for its viability. Although

A. Spin qubits in silicon
Semiconductor spin qubits generally refer to nanoscale qubits encoded in the spin states of electrons or holes in a semiconductor substrate. In this work, we will specifically consider electrons held in quantum dots in silicon, which is a platform that has seen considerable recent progress [30], [31], [34]­[37]. Here we will describe the general terminology and architectural implications of the silicon spin qubit platform, leaving a specific discussion of state-of-the-art performance metrics to Section III. From an architectural perspective, these devices present a compelling substrate for large-scale faulttolerant quantum computing: the qubit footprint is comparably small (dot pitches on the order of tens of nanometers), fabrication is compatible with existing CMOS processes, and spin shuttling is a novel and powerful tool. We refer the interested reader to Ref. [31] for a more thorough review of semiconductor spin qubits.
A silicon quantum dot array is defined by electrostatic gates as depicted in Figure 1, in which we identify three important categories of these gates: "plunger" gates, each of which is tuned to create a quantum dot that can hold one electron; "barrier" gates, which control inter-dot tunnel coupling, used for shuttling and for electron-electron entanglement via the exchange interaction; and the gates that define the large electron reservoirs and quantum dot that form a singleelectron transistor, which is used to measure the spin states of electrons. The simplest way to compute with electrons in quantum dots is to treat individual electrons as qubits, where the two logical states are the spin states | and |; alternative encodings can exploit up to four electrons per qubit to trade control complexity, magnetic gradient requirements, and coupling speed [31]. Generally, increasing the number of electrons that encode each qubit simplifies the control requirements, but may reduce best achievable qubit coherence.

2

