Submitted Manuscript: Confidential December 2025
Polymer-inspired mechanical metamaterials
Zhenyang Gaoa,b,c,d, Pengyuan Rena,b, Yifeng Dongd, Gengchen Zhenga,b, Minh-Son Phame, Xiao Shangc, Shaojia Wangc,f, Shuo Yangf, Zijue Tanga,b, Yongbing Lig,h, Hua Suna,b, Yi Wua,b,i*, Hongjian Jianga,b, Lan Zhangj, Tobin Filleterf, Lingyu Kongk, Kun Zhoud, Haowei Wanga,b,i,l, Yang Lum, Yu Zouc*, Hongze Wanga,b,i,n*
aState Key Labortory of Metal Matrix Composites, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3E4, Canada dSchool of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, 639798, Singapore eDepartment of Materials, Imperial College London, London, SW7 2AZ, UK fDepartment of Mechanical & Industrial Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8, Canada gShanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Manufacture for Thin-walled Structures, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China hState Key Laboratory of Mechanical System and Vibration, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China iInstitute of Alumics Materials, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (Anhui), Huaibei, 235000, China jResearch Center for Intelligent Robotics, Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, 311100, China kInstitute of Marine Equipment, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China lAnhui Province Industrial Generic Technology Research Center for Alumics Materials, Huaibei Normal University, Huaibei, Anhui 235000, China mDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hong Kong, Hongkong, 999077, China nShanghai Key Laboratory of Material Laser Processing and Modification (Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Materials Science and Engineering), Shanghai 200240, China
Corresponding authors: eagle51@sjtu.edu.cn (Yi Wu) mse.zou@utoronto.ca (Yu Zou) hz.wang@sjtu.edu.cn (Hongze Wang)
Abstract Metamaterials benefit from unique architected patterns to achieve lightweight with exceptional mechanical properties inaccessible to conventional materials. Typical mechanical metamaterials are inspired by crystal-like lattice structures, whose closely packed frameworks often exhibit a rigid mechanical nature. Here, we present polymerinspired metamaterials (PIMs) by programming deformation and strengthening mechanisms that mimic the mechanical roles of key constituent elements in polymer networks. By combining metamaterial programmability with polymer-inspired structures, we design crosslinking, proto-crystalline order, and entanglement in PIMs to enable
1

Submitted Manuscript: Confidential December 2025
macroscale strengthening mechanisms inspired by crosslink, molecular-density, and prestretch strengthening in polymers, expanding the metamaterial structure-property design space. This macroscale polymer-inspired programmability also suggests that PIMs could serve as a design platform incorporating the programmability strategies to achieve desired deformation and strengthening responses, holding a potential for applications in soft robotic joints and compliant connectors. Keywords: metamaterials, additive manufacturing, biometrics, soft robotics
1. Introduction Mechanical metamaterials1, 2, 3, created by novel, intricate internal microstructures, exhibit mechanical properties beyond natural materials. Strategies for internal microstructure are mainly inspired by crystal-inspired structures and bonding like body-centered-cubic (BCC)4, face-centered-cubic (FCC)5, or octet-truss6 to obtain superior mechanical characteristics such as exceptional stiffness7, 8, 9, strength10, 11, damage tolerance12, 13, 14, and energy absorption15, 16, 17. However, the internal architecture, relying on either the crystallike periodic arrangements, or employing the straight connection (e.g. struts or plates) similar to atomic bonding, exhibits a rigidity that limits plastic yielding, stretchability and fracture strains and is heavily dependent on the inherent properties of parent materials to expand their attainable property space. To broaden the material property space of mechanical metamaterials, existing studies have extensively explored new topological designs18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and introduced different strengthening mechanisms13, 23, 24, 25 for these crystal-inspired metamaterials (CIMs). Some research has also focused on biomimetic structural modifications16, 26, 27, 28 or working on their parent materials29, 30, 31, 32 to overcome this limit. Nevertheless, the fundamental deformation mechanics of structures with crystalinspired bonding remain unchanged, which limits the expansion of their material properties and, consequently, their application range. In contrast, polymers, with their twisted, entangled, and soft molecular chains reinforced by crosslinks, exhibit a high level of plasticity and molecular mechanics different from that in crystals33, 34. This raises a fundamental question: can mechanical metamaterials be engineered to mimic polymerenabled behaviors, thereby changing the deformation mechanics of existing metamaterial designs?
Replicating polymer microstructures35, 36, 37 in metamaterials, characterized by highly twisted and crosslinked molecular chains, remains challenging. This complexity is beyond regular atomic arrangements in crystal materials38, 39, 40. Notable studies41,42 have transformed CIM-derived structures into twisted architectures to achieve enhanced flexibility and functional performance43,44, such as fracture resistance45, large extendability46, extreme specific strength47, and highly recoverable deformation48. These advantages inspire the development of more stretchable architected beams that are mechanically similar to flexible polymer-chain elements. Building on these features, it is of interest to move toward truly polymer-network-based structures, in which chain-based architectures are interconnected by crosslinks. In addition, it is also meaningful to design polymer-inspired chains with non-periodic and more flexible architectures to enable polymer-inspired mechanical behaviour at the architectural scale. For polymer-inspired networks, a successful translation of polymer strengthening mechanisms, including molecular density (MD) strengthening, crosslink (CL) strengthening, and pre-stretch (PS)
2

