arXiv:2602.10177v3 [cs.LG] 6 Mar 2026

2026-3-9
Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research
Tony Feng*, Trieu H. Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Dawsen Hwang, Yuri Chervonyi, Junehyuk Jung, Joonkyung Lee, Carlo Pagano, Sang-hyun Kim, Federico Pasqualotto, Sergei Gukov, Jonathan N. Lee, Junsu Kim, Kaiying Hou, Golnaz Ghiasi, Yi Tay, YaGuang Li, Chenkai Kuang, Yuan Liu, Hanzhao Lin, Evan Zheran Liu, Nigamaa Nayakanti, Xiaomeng Yang, Heng-Tze Cheng, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Quoc V. Le*, Thang Luong* *Project leads. Mathematicians. Work conducted under Google DeepMind.
Recent advances in foundational models have yielded reasoning systems capable of achieving a goldmedal standard at the International Mathematical Olympiad. We undertake the transition from competition-level problem solving to professional research, which presents significant new challenges. To this end we introduce Aletheia, a math research agent that iteratively generates, verifies, and revises solutions end-to-end in natural language, leveraging a novel inference-time scaling law based upon Gemini Deep Think. We demonstrate the capability of Aletheia through several milestones in autonomous mathematics research: multiple publication-grade papers, including one with no human intervention (Feng26); an extensive semi-autonomous evaluation (Feng et al., 2026b) on 700 open problems from Bloom's Erds Conjectures database, including autonomous solutions to four open questions; and a leading performance on FirstProof , a collection of research-level problems proposed by mathematicians to assess AI capabilities for mathematical research. Full transcripts of prompts and model outputs are shared at https://github.com/google-deepmind/superhuman/tree/main/aletheia. In order to help the public better understand the developments pertaining to AI and mathematics, we suggest quantifying standard levels of autonomy and novelty of AI-assisted results, and propose the concept of "human-AI interaction cards" for transparent documentation. We conclude with reflections on human-AI collaboration in mathematics.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in the reasoning capabilities of natural language-based AI in competition mathematics (Luong et al., 2025). Notably, AI models have already achieved goldmedal performance in the 2025 International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) (Luong and Lockhart, 2025), widely regarded as the world's premier mathematics competition. This milestone motivates a fundamental question regarding AI-driven scientific discovery: can AI autonomously discover and prove new mathematical theorems? The transition from contest to research mathematics presents significant challenges. Unlike self-contained competition problems, research questions require synthesizing advanced techniques from an extensive body of literature. This poses a major hurdle for foundation or large language models, which often hallucinate and exhibit only a superficial understanding of specialized topics--limitations likely stemming from a scarcity of relevant training data.
To explore this challenge, we developed Aletheia, a math research agent that can iteratively generate, verify, and revise solutions end-to-end in natural language. Aletheia is powered by three main sources: (i) an advanced version of Gemini Deep Think (Deep Think team, 2025) for tackling extremely hard reasoning problems, (ii) a novel inference-time scaling law that extends from Olympiadlevel problems to PhD-level exercises, and (iii) intensive tool use such as Google Search and web browsing to navigate the complexities of mathematical research. This paper presents and reflects on the initial wave of mathematical research papers achieved by Aletheia1 in collaboration with
1See our project page https://github.com/google-deepmind/superhuman/tree/main/aletheia for de-
Corresponding author(s): fengtony@google.com, thangluong@google.com. External affiliations: UC Berkeley (Tony Feng), Brown University (Junehyuk Jung), Yonsei University (Joonkyung Lee), Concordia University (Carlo Pagano), Korea Institute for Advanced Study (Sang-hyun Kim), UC San Diego (Federico Pasqualotto), Caltech (Sergei Gukov). © 2026 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved

Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research

mathematicians:
A Reliable autonomous research. A research paper (Feng26) generated by AI without any human intervention, calculating certain structure constants in arithmetic geometry called eigenweights.
B AI-guided collaboration. A research paper (LeeSeo26) demonstrating human-AI collaboration in proving bounds on systems of interacting particles called independent sets.
C An extensive semi-autonomous evaluation on the Erds problems. A report (Feng et al., 2026b) on a systematic deployment of our agent on the 700 open problems on Bloom's Erds Conjectures database2, including four open questions of Erds that it resolves, verified semi-autonomously using both AI grading and human experts. Beyond solving Erds-1051 completely, our model drove a generalization which resulted in a research paper (BKKKZ26).
D In addition, the agent contributed intermediate propositions on two further research papers, (FYZ26) and (ACGKMP26), improving prior proofs by the human authors.
Finally, Aletheia achieved a leading performance (Feng et al., 2026a) on FirstProof , a collection of ten research-level math problems that was proposed by academic mathematicians in (Abouzaid et al., 2026) as an assessment of current AI capabilities.
Given the current pace of improvement, it seems inevitable that AI will play an increasing role in mathematics research. However, for the vast majority of mathematics research results, only a few experts are equipped to properly evaluate their novelty and significance. This evaluation gap has enabled misinformation about AI-generated mathematics to spread unchecked in popular media. With a view towards transparent communication of future developments to the public, we propose codifying representations of AI-generated mathematics according to a standard taxonomy of "Autonomous Mathematics Research Levels", analogous to the SAE Levels of Vehicle Autonomy.

Level 0: Negligible Novelty
Level 1: Minor Novelty
Level 2: Publishable Research
Level 3: Major Advance Level 4: Landmark Breakthrough

Primarily Human (secondary AI input)
Complexity Bounds (ACGKMP26)
Arithmetic Volumes (FYZ26)

Human-AI Collaboration

Essentially Autonomous
Erds-652, 654, 1040 (Feng et al., 2026b)

Erds-1051 (Feng et al., 2026b)

Generalized Erds-1051 (BKKKZ26)
Independence Polynomials (LeeSeo26)

Eigenweights (Feng26)

Table 1 | Classification of all AI-assisted mathematics results encompassed in this work. Detailed
descriptions of the categories, with discussion and examples, can be found in §6.1. Works listed as Level 2 in this table have been submitted for publications.

While the ultimate specifics of such a taxonomy should be left to the mathematical community, we suggest features that would be informative, such as separate axes for representing the mathematical significance and the degree of AI contribution. For concreteness, we sketch one possible taxonomy in
tailed prompts and model outputs. 2https://www.erdosproblems.com/.

2

