arXiv:2604.07455v1 [cs.AI] 8 Apr 2026

Munkres' General Topology Autoformalized in Isabelle/HOL
Dustin Bryant1, Jonathan JuliÃn Huerta y Munive2, Cezary Kaliszyk3, and Josef Urban4
1 Independent, brydustin@gmail.com 2 Aalborg University, jjhymuni@cs.aau.dk 3 University of Melbourne, ckaliszyk@unimelb.edu.au 4 AI4REASON and University of Gothenburg / Chalmers University
josef.urban@gmail.com
Abstract. We describe an experiment in LLM-assisted autoformalization that produced over 85,000 lines of Isabelle/HOL code covering all 39 sections of Munkres' Topology (general topology, Chapters 2Ù8), from topological spaces through dimension theory. The LLM-based coding agents (initially ChatGPT 5.2 and then Claude Opus 4.6) used 24 active days for that. The formalization is complete: all 806 formal results are fully proved with zero sorry's. Proved results include the Tychonoff theorem, the Baire category theorem, the NagataÙSmirnov and Smirnov metrization theorems, the StoneÙCech compactification, Ascoli's theorem, the space-filling curve, and others. The methodology is based on a "sorry-first" declarative proof workflow combined with bulk use of sledgehammer - two of Isabelle major strengths. This leads to relatively fast autoformalization progress. We analyze the resulting formalization in detail, analyze the humanÙLLM interaction patterns from the session log, and briefly compare with related autoformalization efforts in Megalodon, HOL Light, and Naproche. The results indicate that LLM-assisted formalization of standard mathematical textbooks in Isabelle/HOL is quite feasible, cheap and fast, even if some human supervision is useful.
1 Introduction
Formalization of mathematics-- translation of informal textbook proofs into machine-checkable code--has typically required substantial manual effort. Major formal proof libraries such as Isabelle's Analysis library [18], Lean's Mathlib, and the Mizar Mathematical Library [2] represent years or decades of cumulative work by dedicated communities. The possibility that large language models might significantly accelerate this process has therefore attracted considerable interest.
In January 2026, the fourth author reported an experiment in which approximately 130,000 lines of formal topology were produced in roughly two weeks, formalizing large portions of Munkres' Topology [15] in the Megalodon proof system [21] using ChatGPT 5.2 via the Codex CLI. Despite being conducted in

2

D. Bryant, J. J. Huerta y Munive, C. Kaliszyk, J. Urban

a relatively lightweight system with limited prior training data, the experiment demonstrated that large-scale autoformalization is feasible in practice.
The present paper describes a related experiment:5 the autoformalization of the same textbook in Isabelle/HOL [16], one of the field's most mature and wellsupported proof assistants. In this setting, the LLM has access to Isabelle's extensive library (Complex_Main), powerful proof automation (sledgehammer [3], blast, auto, etc.), and the structured (declarative) Isar proof language. These features provide a substantially richer environment than in the Megalodon experiment. A natural question is whether such infrastructure significantly reduces the difficulty and speeds up the large-scale formalization. In practice, both effects are observed: the available automation and library support simplify and speed up some aspects of the development, while on the other hand, the more complex setting requires more involved oversight of the available tools.
Main results. Over 24 active days (March 2 Ù April 3, 2026), the project produced 85,472 lines of Isabelle/HOL across four chapter files, comprising 199 definitions and 806 lemmas, theorems, and corollaries covering all 39 sections (ÏÏ12Ù 50) of point-set topology in Munkres' book. The formalization is complete: all results are fully proved with zero sorry's. Chapter 1 (Set Theory and Logic) is covered by Isabelle's Complex_Main. Among the proved results are the Tychonoff theorem, the Baire category theorem (both parts), the NagataÙSmirnov and Smirnov metrization theorems, the StoneÙCech compactification, both the classical and general versions of Ascoli's theorem (Theorems 45.4 and 47.1-- the latter depending on Tychonoff), Theorem 48.5 (pointwise limits on Baire spaces), the space-filling curve (Theorem 44.1), and the existence of a nowheredifferentiable function (Theorem 49.1).
Methodology. The experiment used two LLMs in sequence--ChatGPT 5.2 for bulk formalization and Claude Opus 4.6 for proof development--both driven by an automated tmux-based prompting loop. The central methodological idea is a "sorry-first" workflow: proof skeletons are written with placeholders, which are subsequently filled using automated reasoning tools such as sledgehammer. This separates proof structure from proof search.
Contributions. We produced: (1) a complete autoformalization of Munkres' general topology in a mainstream proof assistant--all 806 results fully proved with zero sorry's. While we evolved the prompt and the methods, no part of the code has been written by a human (this is an intentional design choice of this experiment).6 (2) A methodology for the long-running LLMÙIsabelle interaction largely based on the sorry-first/sledgehammer workflow. (3) Analysis of the session log, revealing patterns of humanÙLLM interaction. (4) A comparison with several related autoformalization efforts on the same source material. (5) A qualitative evaluation of the mathematical adequacy of the formalization.
5 The code is at https://github.com/JUrban/isa_top_autoform1 . 6 It is obviously possible to include human modifications and this will likely be done in
various ways with this material in the future. However, direct and continued human modification usually makes the scientific results of autoformalization experiments and evaluations much less clear.

