arXiv:2605.08907v1 [astro-ph.CO] 9 May 2026

The Status of Gravitational Vector Perturbations with Recent CMB Data
Ali Rida Khalife,a Cyril Pitroua
aInstitut d'Astrophysique de Paris, CNRS UMR 7095, 98 bis Bd Arago, 75014 Paris, France. E-mail: ridakhal@iap.fr, pitrou@iap.fr
Abstract. We present new constraints on gravitational vector perturbations (V-modes)
using Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) data, including temperature and E-mode polarization from SPT-3G D1, ACT-DR6, and Planck , as well as B-mode data from BICEP/Keck and SPTpol, which provide the strongest constraints on V-modes. We consider three initial conditions (ICs) that source V-modes: neutrino isocurvature (ISO), neutrino octupole (OCT), and a sourced mode (SMD) generated by an anisotropic stress before matter­radiation equality. We also consider including tensor modes along with V-modes for each of these ICs. Combining all datasets, we obtain 95% confidence level upper limits of rv < 1.3 × 10-4 (ISO), rv < 6.8 (OCT), and rv < 4.2 (SMD), with slightly tighter bounds when tensors are included, at a pivot scale kp = 0.05 Mpc-1. Interestingly, for SMD without tensors, using SPTpol B-modes alone yields rv = 4.7 ± 2.1, consistent with zero at 2.2. Similar result is found for SMD when including tensor perturbations. No statistically significant deviation from CDM is found. However, V-modes are not fully excluded by current B-mode data and should be considered when interpreting primordial signals.

Contents

1 Introduction

1

2 Review of V-modes and their Initial Conditions

2

2.1 V-modes

2

2.2 The Three Initial Conditions

3

3 Data Sets and Numerical Setup

4

4 Results

5

4.1 Vector Modes Alone

5

4.2 Adding Tensor Modes

7

5 Conclusion

9

1 Introduction
The General theory of Relativity (GR) predicts three types of perturbations: scalar, vector and tensor [1­5]. They differ from each other under infinitesimal gauge transformations, and by their impact on cosmological observables, specifically the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) [6­9]. Most efforts in the last couple of decades have been dedicated to scalar and tensor modes, but not as much so for vector perturbations (V-modes). Historically, the reason for that is the decaying nature of V-modes when assuming standard, adiabatic ICs, which results in a negligible impact on the CMB.
The decaying nature of adiabatic V-modes implies an irregular behavior when extrapolated backward in time, as the Universe would be in a contracting phase [10]1. This irregularity can result in breaking of perturbation theory, which one might consider as a challenge to GR. However, if there are mechanisms in the primordial universe (e.g. primordial magnetic fields [13­22]) that can source the comoving V-modes, then they avoid this issue and can leave an imprint on the CMB. Hence, V-modes are an advantageous window to better understand the primordial universe.
Recently [23], we investigated three distinct initial conditions (ICs) for gravitational vector modes (V-modes) to see whether they can be a plausible magnetogenesis mechanism. We found that it is not the case. However, the presence of V-modes is not completely ruled out by the available data.
In this article, we follow up on our findings in [23] and present constraints on these V-modes ICs using temperature and E-mode polarization data from SPT-3G D1 [24, 25], ACT-DR6 [26­28] and Planck [29, 30]. We also include B-mode polarization data from SPTpol [31, 32] and BICEP/Keck [33]. As we will see later, B-modes are the most impactful in providing strong constraints on the parameters of V-modes.
The article is organized as follows. We give a concise review of the theory behind V-modes in Section 2, followed by a description of the data sets and numerical implementation considered in Section 3. Our main results, presented in Section 4, are divided into two parts. Section 4.1 presents constraints on each of the three ICs of V-modes when they are present along with only scalar perturbations, while in Section 4.2 we present constraints when also tensor perturbations (T -modes) are present. We finish the article with a brief discussion and conclusion in Section 5.
1Note that this is also a problem for bouncing universe models within GR [11, 12]

­1­

