arXiv:2606.06523v2 [cs.AI] 15 Jun 2026

Lean4Agent: Formal Modeling and Verification for Agent Workflow and Trajectory
Ruida Wang1, Jerry Huang1, Pengcheng Wang1, Xuanqing Liu2, Luyang Kong2 Tong Zhang1 1University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 2Independent researcher {ruidaw,jerry8,pw29}@illinois.edu xuanqingliu@outlook.com, luyangkong@gmail.com tozhang@illinois.edu
Abstract
Equipping Large Language Models (LLMs) to execute reliable multi-step workflows has become a central challenge in artificial intelligence. Despite recent advances in LLMs' agentic capabilities, most agent systems still lack formal methods for specifying, verifying, and debugging their workflow and execution trajectories. This challenge mirrors a long-standing problem in mathematics, where the ambiguity of natural languages (NLs) motivates the development of formal languages (FLs). Inspired by this paradigm, we propose Lean4Agent, to the best of our knowledge, the first framework that uses Lean4, a dependent-type FL to model and verify agent behavior. Lean4Agent launches FormalAgentLib, an extensible Lean4 library for formally modeling and verifying agent workflows' semantic consistency under explicit assumptions, and enabling localization of executiontime failures revealed by trajectories. Building on FormalAgentLib, we further develop LeanEvolve, which applies results in FormalAgentLib to revise workflows to enhance its capability. Extensive experiments on a hard problem subset of SWE-Bench-Verified [Jimenez et al., 2024] and a subset of ELAIP-Bench [Dai et al., 2025] across 5 leading LLMs indicate that the verification-passing workflows outperform the failing ones by an average of 11.94%, and LeanEvolve further improves SWE performance by 7.47% on average. Furthermore, Lean4Agent establishes a foundation for a new field of using expressive dependent-type FL to formally model and verify agent behavior.
1 Introduction
Developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems with mathematically provable properties has long been a central aspiration of the computer science community [Seshia et al., 2022]. With the rapid development of LLMs' agentic capabilities, complex LLM-agent workflows are increasingly being deployed in high-stakes domains [Tran et al., 2025]. This trend heightens the need for formal speculations about LLM agent systems in both workflow specification and execution trajectory levels.
Existing approaches to verifying LLM-based systems remain fragmented in scope and formats. Early approaches, such as LLM-as-judge [Zheng et al., 2023], evaluate models' NL outputs but remain vulnerable to hallucination and overconfidence, especially in long-horizon executions [Lin et al., 2025a]. Recent work has introduced formal methods, including simple Hoare-style logic contracts for verifying tool calls [Liu et al., 2026], SMT-backed verification of action-level policies [Miculicich et al., 2025], and temporal-logic checking of its artifacts [Ramani et al., 2025]. However, each line of work only addresses part of the problem and is constrained by the expressiveness of its underlying formal language. The temporal logic language is unable to model data-dependent properties, and SMTbased contract checks struggle to express higher-order reasoning. Thus, to the best of our knowledge, existing work does not yet provide a unified framework for formally modeling and verifying agent
Preprint.

YAML Agent Workflow

Workflow Verification

Layer 1: Structural Verification

Type Checking (BaseType system)
Execution Graph formation

Read / Write consistency
Graph soundness verification

Layer 2: Predicate-based Static Semantic Verification

Variable + Step-instruction

Precondition

Agent step

Postcondition

LLM annotation
Variable with Inferred Pred.

Verify consistency
Acc. Predicate context
LLMExec

Updated predicate context

Next agent step

Formal Guided Evolve

Trajectory
Formal AgentLib

Error localization

Error Explanation

LLM

LLM Error Fix

Original Workflow

Evolved Workflow

Agent Execution
Execution trajectory

Layer 3: Execution Trajectory Verification

Execution Results

Verification Results

Optional
Evolve Agent

Lean verification

External-Tool verification

LLM-asjudge

Errors step

Evolved Step

Pure LLM Evolve

Trajectory

LLM

Original Workflow

Evolved Workflow

(a) FormalAgentLib

(b) LeanEvolve

Figure 1: Lean4Agent Framework: The Lean4Agent framework consists of two main components. (a) FormalAgentLib is a three-layer Lean4 library for formally modeling and verifying agent behaviors. Layer 1 verifies the structural correctness of the workflow through a workflow graph. Layer 2 develops a predicate (pred.) system to model pre- and post-conditions of agent executions and verify the semantic self-consistency using LLMExec assumptions. Layer 3 localizes the violated step in the workflow by applying Lean, external programs, and LLM-as-judge to check the execution trajectory. (b) LeanEvolve uses verification results to refine workflows, and it builds formal-guided workflow evolution with the pure-LLM evolve add-on to further enhance its capabilities.

workflows and trajectories. Both are important for long-horizon autonomous agents [Wang et al., 2026].
A parallel challenge has long existed in modern pure mathematics, where most problems involve proving theorems without numerical answers. Because NL is inherently ambiguous, validating complex mathematical arguments becomes increasingly difficult as proofs grow in length and sophistication. To address this issue, mathematicians and computer scientists have adopted dependent type theory [Martin-Löf and Sambin, 1984] to formally verify proofs. This paradigm has led to expressive formal languages (FLs) such as Lean [De Moura et al., 2015, Moura and Ullrich, 2021] and Coq [Coq, 1996], as well as LLM tools for them. Despite their success in mathematics, the application of FL to uniformly model and verify the LLM agent systems remains largely understudied.
To address these challenges, we propose Lean4Agent, to the best of our knowledge, the first framework that uses dependent-type FL to uniformly model, verify, and refine agent systems. The overview of Lean4Agent can be found in Figure 1. Lean4Agent launches FormalAgentLib, an extensible three-layer Lean4 library for formally modeling and verifying agent workflows and trajectories across three levels of correctness: structural, semantic, and runtime trajectory. Layer 1 verifies the structural well-formedness of the agent workflow, analogous to compiler-level checks for programs. Layer 2 develops a dependent-type predicate system to specify pre- and post-conditions for individual execution steps. It also enables us to uniformly model branching, looping, and submodule composition behaviors. With LLMExec, an assumption of LLMs' local correctness, we are able to automate the proof of static semantic soundness while being extensible to new domains. It is done by type matching, Hoare-logic reasoning, and auxiliary theorems proved by FormalAgentLib. This layer allows workflow specifications to be formally verified under assumptions before deployment, supporting correct-by-construction workflow design [Seshia et al., 2022]. Layer 3 uses a verified workflow with the help of an LLM to inspect execution trajectories, determine whether step-level preand post-conditions are satisfied, and localize the execution step responsible for the failure.

2

